---
title: C Input/Output
permalink: /docs/c-08/
---

## printf()

Use `printf()` to produce formatted output.  

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main()
{
  int dec = 5;
  char ch = 's';
  float pi = 3.14;

  printf("%d %f %c\n", dec, pi,  ch);
}
```

## scanf()

`scanf()` is used to read formatted input from the command line.  

```c
#include <stdio.h>

main()
{
  int x;
  int args;

  printf("Enter an integer: ");
  if (( args = scanf("%d", &x)) == 0) {
      printf("Error: not an integer\n");
  } else {
      printf("Read in %d\n", x);
  }
}
```

We'll come to exactly what `&x` means, for now it means the memory address of the variable x. `scanf()` tries to read input from the command line in to the variable in the second argument, matching the format described in the first argument. If the input read doesn't match the required type `scanf()` returns zero. If it does match `scanf()` returns the number of values successfully scanned and stores the value in the variable.  

`scanf()` can read in several values at a time.  

```c
scanf( "%i %i %i %i", &minx, &maxx, &miny, &maxy);
```

will read in four integers separated by spaces.  

We can use the format qualifiers described earlier.  

```c
int a;
scanf("%5d", &a);
```

limits the input to a five digit integer.  

## puts()

The `puts()` function writes a string to the output and appends a new line to it.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

int main () {
   char string[15];

   strcpy(string, "Hello Mum");

   puts(string);
   
   return(0);
}
```

## gets()

The C library function char *gets(char *str) reads a line from stdin and stores it into the string pointed to by str. It stops when either the newline character is read or when the end-of-file is reached, whichever comes first.  

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main () {
   char str[50];

   printf("Enter a string : ");
   gets(str);

   printf("You entered: %s", str);

   return(0);
}
```

#### Exercise 1

1. Log in to repl.it
2. Create a new repl. Make it a C program and call it `io_demo`
3. Demonstrate reading a string in using `scanf()` and outputting it using `printf()`
4. Demonstrate reading a string in using `gets()` and outputting it using `puts()`
4. Demonstrate reading in two strings, and outputting `same` or `different` after comparing them.
